CHAPTER 2
THE FOREST JOURNEY
ENLIL of the mountain, the father of the gods, had decreed the destiny of Gilgamesh. So
Gilgamesh dreamed and Enkidu said, ‘The meaning of the dream is this. The father of the gods
has given you kingship, such is your destiny, everlasting life is not your destiny. Because of this
do not be sad at heart, do not be grieved or oppressed. He has given you power to bind and to
loose, to be the darkness and the light of mankind. He has given you unexampled supremacy
over the people, victory in battle from which no fugitive returns, in forays and assaults from
which there is no going back. But do not abuse this power, deal justly with your servants in the
palace, deal justly before Shamash.’
The eyes of Enkidu were full of tears and his heart was sick. He sighed bitterly and
Gilgamesh met his eye and said, ‘My friend, why do you sigh so bitterly? But Enkidu opened his
mouth and said, ‘1 am weak, my arms have lost their strength, the cry of sorrow sticks in my
throat, I am oppressed by idleness.’ It was then that the lord Gilgamesh turned his thoughts to the
Country of the Living; on the Land of Cedars the lord Gilgamesh reflected. He said to his servant
Enkidu, ‘I have not established my name stamped on bricks as my destiny decreed; therefore I
will go to the country where the cedar is felled. I will set up my name in the place where the
names of famous men are written, and where no man’s name is written yet I will raise a
monument to the gods. Because of the evil that is in the land, we will go to the forest and destroy
the evil; for in the forest lives Humbaba whose name is “Hugeness”, a ferocious giant.’ But
Enkidu sighed bitterly and said, ‘When I went with the wild beasts ranging through the
wilderness I discovered the forest; its length is ten thousand leagues in every direction. Enlil has
appointed Humbaba to guard it and armed him in sevenfold terrors, terrible to all flesh is
Humbaba. When he roars it is like the torrent of the storm, his breath is like fire, and his jaws are
death itself. He guards the cedars so well that when the wild heifer stirs in the forest, though she
is sixty leagues distant, he hears her. What man would willingly walk into that country and
explore its depths? I tell you, weakness overpowers whoever goes near it: it is not an equal
struggle when one fights with Humbaba; he is a great warrior, a battering-ram. Gilgamesh, the
watchman of the forest never sleeps.’
6
Gilgamesh replied: ‘Where is the man who can clamber to heaven? Only the gods live
forever with glorious Shamash, but as for us men, our days are numbered, our occupations are a
breath of wind. How is this, already you are afraid! I will go first although I am your lord, and
you may safely call out, “Forward, there is nothing to fear!” Then if I fall I leave behind me a
name that endures; men will say of me, “Gilgamesh has fallen in fight with ferocious Humbaba.”
Long after the child has been born in my house, they will say it, and remember.’ Enkidu spoke
again to Gilgamesh, ‘O my lord, if you will enter that country, go first to the hero Shamash, tell
the Sun God, for the land is his. The country where the cedar is cut belongs to Shamash.’
Gilgamesh took up a kid, white without spot, and a brown one with it; he held them against
his breast, and he carried them into the presence of the sun. He took in his hand his silver sceptre
and he said to glorious Shamash, ‘I am going to that country, O Shamash, I am going; my hands
supplicate, so let it be well with my soul and bring me back to the quay of Uruk. Grant, I
beseech, your protection, and let the omen be good.’ Glorious Shamash answered, Gilgamesh,
you are strong, but what is the Country of the Living to you?’
‘O Shamash, hear me, hear me, Shamash, let my voice be heard. Here in the city man dies
oppressed at heart, man perishes with despair in his heart. I have looked over the wall and I see
the bodies floating on the river, and that will be my lot also. Indeed I know it is so, for whoever
is tallest among men cannot reach the heavens, and the greatest cannot encompass the earth.
Therefore I would enter that country: because I have not established my name stamped on brick
as my destiny decreed, I will go to the country where the cedar is cut. I will set up my name
where the names of famous men are written; and where no man’s name is written I will raise a
monument to the gods.’ The tears ran down his face and he said, ‘Alas, it is a long journey that I
must take to the Land of Humbaba. If this enterprise is not to be accomplished, why did you
move me, Shamash, with the restless desire to perform it? How can I succeed if you will not
succour me? If I die in that country I will die without rancour, but if I return I will make a
glorious offering of gifts and of praise to Shamash.’
So Shamash accepted the sacrifice of his tears; like the compassionate man he showed him
mercy. He appointed strong allies for Gilgamesh, sons of one mother, and stationed them in the
mountain caves. The great winds he appointed: the north wind, the whirlwind, the storm and the
icy wind, the tempest and the scorching wind. Like vipers, like dragons, like a scorching fire,
like a serpent that freezes the heart, a destroying flood and the lightning’s fork, such were they
and Gilgamesh rejoiced.
He went to the forge and said, ‘I will give orders to the armourers; they shall cast us our
weapons while we watch them.’ So they gave orders to the armourers and the craftsmen sat
down in conference. They went into the groves of the plain and cut willow and box-wood; they
cast for them axes of nine score pounds, and great swords they cast with blades of six score
pounds each one, with pommels and hilts of thirty pounds. They cast for Gilgamesh the axe
‘Might of Heroes’ and the bow of Anshan; and Gilgamesh was armed and Enkidu; and the
weight of the arms they carried was thirty score pounds.
The people collected and the counsellors in the streets and in the market-place of Uruk; they 
7
came through the gate of seven bolts and Gilgamesh spoke to them in the market-place: ‘I,
Gilgamesh, go to see that creature of whom such things are spoken, the rumour of whose name
fills the world. I will conquer him in his cedar wood and show the strength of the sons of Uruk,
all the world shall know of it. I am committed to this enterprise: to climb the mountain, to cut
down the cedar, and leave behind me an enduring name.’ The counsellors of Uruk, the great
market, answered him: ‘Gilgamesh, you are young, your courage carries you too far, you cannot
know what this enterprise means which you plan. We have heard that Humbaba is not like men
who die, his weapons are such that none can stand against them; the forest stretches for ten
thousand leagues in every direction; who would willingly go down to explore its depths? As for
Humbaba, when he roars it is like the torrent of the storm, his breath is like fire and his jaws are
death itself. Why do you crave to do this thing, Gilgamesh? It is no equal struggle when one
fights with Humbaba, that battering- ram!
When he heard these words of the counsellors Gilgamesh looked at his friend and laughed,
‘How shall I answer them; shall I say I am afraid of Humbaba, I will sit at home all the rest of
my days?’ Then Gilgamesh opened his mouth again and said to Enkidu, ‘My friend, let us go to
the Great Palace, to Egalmah, and stand before Ninsun the queen. Ninsun is wise with deep
knowledge, she will give us counsel for the road we must go.’ They took each other by the hand
as they went to Egalmah, and they went to Ninsun the great queen. Gilgamesh approached, he
entered the palace and spoke to Ninsun. ‘Ninsun, will you listen to me; I have a long journey to
go, to the Land of Humbaba, I must travel an unknown road and fight a strange battle. From the
day I go until I return, till I reach the cedar forest and destroy the evil which Shamash abhors,
pray for me to Shamash!
Ninsun went into her room, she put on a dress becoming to her body, she put on jewels to
make her breast beautiful, she placed a tiara on her head and her skirts swept the ground. Then
she went up to the altar of the Sun, standing upon the roof of the palace; she burnt incense and
lifted her arms to Shamash as the smoke ascended: ‘O Shamash, why did you give this restless
heart to Gilgamesh, my son; why did you give it? You have moved him and now he sets out on a
long journey to the Land of Humbaba, to travel an unknown road and fight a strange battle.
Therefore from the day that he goes till the day he returns, until he reaches the cedar forest, until
he kills Humbaba and destroys the evil thing which you, Shamash, abhor, do not forget him; but
let the dawn, Aya, your dear bride, remind you always, and when day is done give him to the
watchman of the night to keep him from harm.’ Then Ninsun the mother of Gilgamesh
extinguished the incense, and she called to Enkidu with this exhortation: ‘Strong Enkidu, you are
not the child of my body, but I will receive you as my adopted son; you are my other child like
the foundlings they bring to the temple. Serve Gilgamesh as a foundling serves the temple and
the priestess who reared him. In the presence of my women, my votaries and hierophants, I
declare it.’ Then she placed the amulet for a pledge round his neck, and she said to him, ‘I entrust
my son to you; bring him back to me safely.’
And now they brought to them the weapons, they put in their hands the great swords in their
golden scabbards, and the bow and the quiver. Gilgamesh took the axe, he slung the quiver from 
8
his shoulder, and the bow of Anshan, and buckled the sword to his belt; and so they were armed
and ready for the journey. Now all the people came and pressed on them and said, ‘When will
you return to the city?’ The counsellors blessed Gilgamesh and warned him, ‘Do not trust too
much in your own strength, be watchful, restrain your blows at first. The one who goes in front
protects his companion; the good guide who knows the way guards his friend. Let Enkidu lead
the way, he knows the road to the forest, he has seen Humbaba and is experienced in battles; let
him press first into the passes, let him be watchful and look to himself. Let Enkidu protect his
friend, and guard his companion, and bring him safe through the pitfalls of the road. We, the
counsellors of Uruk entrust our king to you, O Enkidu; bring him back safely to us.’ Again to
Gilgamesh they said, ‘May Shamash give you your heart’s desire, may he let you see with your
eyes the thing accomplished which your lips have spoken; may he open a path for you where it is
blocked, and a road for your feet to tread. May he open the mountains for your crossing, and may
the nighttime bring you the blessings of night, and Lugulbanda, your guardian god, stand beside
you for victory. May you have victory in the battle as though you fought with a child. Wash your
feet in the river of Humbaba to which you are journeying; in the evening dig a well, and let there
always be pure water in your water-skin. Offer cold water to Shamash and do not forget
Lugulbanda.’
Then Enkidu opened his mouth and said, ‘Forward, there is nothing to fear. Follow me, for I
know the place where Humbaba lives and the paths where he walks. Let the counsellors go back.
Here is no cause for fear.’ When the counsellors heard this they sped the hero on his way. ‘Go,
Gilgamesh, may your guardian god protect you on the road and bring you safely back to the quay
of Uruk.’
After twenty leagues they broke their fast; after another thirty leagues they stopped for the
night. Fifty leagues they walked in one day; in three days they had walked as much as a journey
of a month and two weeks. They crossed seven mountains before they came to the gate of the
forest. Then Enkidu called out to Gilgamesh, Do not go down into the forest; when I opened the
gate my hand lost its strength.’ Gilgamesh answered him, ‘Dear friend, do not speak like a
coward. Have we got the better of so many dangers and travelled so far, to turn back at last?
You, who are tried in wars and battles, hold close to me now and you will feel no fear of death;
keep beside me and your weakness will pass, the trembling will leave your hand. Would my
friend rather stay behind? No, we will go down together into the heart of the forest. Let your
courage be roused by the battle to come; forget death and follow me, a man resolute in action,
but one who is not foolhardy. When two go together each will protect himself and shield his
companion, and if they fall they leave an enduring name.’
Together they went down into the forest and they came to the green mountain. There they
stood still, they were struck dumb; they stood still and gazed at the forest. They saw the height of
the cedar, they saw the way into the forest and the track where Humbaba was used to walk. The
way was broad and the going was good. They gazed at the mountain of cedars, the dwellingplace of the gods and the throne of Ishtar. The hugeness of the cedar rose in front of the
mountain, its shade was beautiful, full of comfort; mountain and glade were green with 
9
brushwood.
There Gilgamesh dug a well before the setting-sun. He went up the mountain and poured out
fine meal on the ground and said, ‘O mountain, dwelling of the gods, bring me a favourable
dream.’ Then they took each other by the hand and lay down to sleep; and sleep that flows from
the night lapped over them. Gilgamesh dreamed, and at midnight sleep left him, and he told his
dream to his friend. ‘Enkidu, what was it that woke me if you did not? My friend, I have
dreamed a dream. Get up, look at the mountain precipice. The sleep that the gods sent me is
broken. Ah, my friend, what a dream I have had! Terror and confusion; I seized hold of a wild
bull in the wilderness. It bellowed and beat up the dust till the whole sky was dark, my arm was
seized and my tongue bitten. I fell back on my knee; then someone refreshed me with water from
his water-skin.’
Enkidu said, ‘Dear friend, the god to whom we are travelling is no wild bull, though his form
is mysterious. That wild bull which you saw is Shamash the Protector; in our moment of peril he
will take our hands. The one who gave water from his water-skin, that is your own god who
cares for your good name, your Lugulbanda. United with him, together we will accomplish a
work the fame of which will never die.’
Gilgamesh said, ‘I dreamed again. We stood in a deep gorge of the mountain, and beside it
we two were like the smallest of swamp flies; and suddenly the mountain fell, it struck me and
caught my feet from under me. Then came an intolerable light blazing out, and in it was one
whose grace and whose beauty were greater than the beauty of this world. He pulled me out from
under the mountain, he gave me water to drink and my heart was comforted, and he set my feet
on the ground.’
Then Enkidu the child of the plains said, ‘Let us go down from the mountain and talk this
thing over together.’ He said to Gilgamesh the young god, ‘Your dream is good, your dream is
excellent, the mountain which you saw is Humbaba. Now, surely, we will seize and kill him, and
throw his body down as the mountain fell on the plain.’
The next day after twenty leagues they broke their fast, and after another thirty they stopped
for the night. They dug a well before the sun had set and Gilgamesh ascended the mountain. He
poured out fine meal on the ground and said, ‘O mountain, dwelling of the gods, send a dream
for Enkidu, make him a favourable dream.’ The mountain fashioned a dream for Enkidu; it came,
an ominous dream; a cold shower passed over him, it caused him to cower like the mountain
barley under a storm of rain. But Gilgamesh sat with his chin on his knees till the sleep which
flows over all mankind lapped over him. Then, at midnight, sleep left him; he got up and said to
his friend, ‘Did you call me, or why did I wake? Did you touch me, or why am I terrified? Did
not some god pass by, for my limbs are numb with fear? My friend, I saw a third dream and this
dream was altogether frightful. The heavens roared and the earth roared again, daylight failed
and darkness fell, lightnings flashed, fire blazed out, the clouds lowered, they rained down death.
Then the brightness departed, the fire went out, and all was turned to ashes fallen about us. Let
us go down from the mountain and talk this over, and consider what we should do.’
When they had come down from the mountain Gilgamesh seized the axe in his hand: he 
10
felled the cedar. When Humbaba heard the noise far off he was enraged; he cried out, ‘Who is
this that has violated my woods and cut down my cedar?’ But glorious Shamash called to them
out of heaven, ‘Go forward, do not be afraid.’ But now Gilgamesh was overcome by weakness,
for sleep had seized him suddenly, a profound sleep held him; he lay on the ground, stretched out
speechless, as though in a dream. When Enkidu touched him he did not rise, when he spoke to
him he did not reply. ‘O Gilgamesh, Lord of the plain of Kullab, the world grows dark, the
shadows have spread over it, now is the glimmer of dusk. Shamash has departed, his bright head
is quenched in the bosom of his mother Ningal. O Gilgamesh, how long will you lie like this,
asleep? Never let the mother who gave you birth be forced in mourning into the city square.’
At length Gilgamesh heard him; he put on his breastplate, ‘The Voice of Heroes’, of thirty
shekels’ weight; he put it on as though it had been a light garment that he carried, and it covered
him altogether. He straddled the earth like a bull that snuffs the ground and his teeth were
clenched. ‘By the life of my mother Ninsun who gave me birth, and by the life of my father,
divine Lugulbanda, let me live to be the wonder of my mother, as when she nursed me on her
lap.’ A second time he said to him, ‘By the life of Ninsun my mother who gave me birth, and by
the life of my father, divine Lugulbanda, until we have fought this man, if man he is, this god, if
god he is, the way that I took to the Country of the Living will not turn back to the city.’
Then Enkidu, the faithful companion, pleaded, answering him, ‘O my lord, you do not know
this monster and that is the reason you are not afraid. I who know him, I am terrified. His teeth
are dragon’s fangs, his countenance is like a lion, his charge is the rushing of the flood, with his
look he crushes alike the trees of the forest and reeds in the swamp. O my Lord, you may go on
if you choose into this land, but I will go back to the city. I will tell the lady your mother all your
glorious deeds till she shouts for joy: and then I will tell the death that followed till she weeps for
bitterness.’ But Gilgamesh said, ‘Immolation and sacrifice are not yet for me, the boat of the
dead shall not go down, nor the three-ply cloth be cut for my shrouding. Not yet will my people
be desolate, nor the pyre be lit in my house and my dwelling burnt on the fire.
Today, give me your aid and you shall have mine: what then can go amiss with us two? All
living creatures born of the flesh shall sit at last in the boat of the West, and when it sinks, when
the boat of Magilum sinks, they are gone; but we shall go forward and fix our eyes on this
monster. If your heart is fearful throw away fear; if there is terror in it throw away terror. Take
your axe in your hand and attack. He who leaves the fight unfinished is not at peace.’ Humbaba
came out from his strong house of cedar. Then Enkidu called out, ‘O Gilgamesh, remember now
your boasts in Uruk. Forward, attack, son of Uruk, there is nothing to fear.’ When he heard these
words his courage rallied; he answered, ‘Make haste, close in, if the watchman is there do not let
him escape to the woods where he will vanish. He has put on the first of his seven splendours but
not, yet the other six, let us trap him before he is armed.’ Like a raging wild bull he snuffed the
ground; the watchman of the woods turned full of threatenings, he cried out. Humbaba came
from his strong house of cedar. He nodded his head and shook it, menacing Gilgamesh; and on
him he fastened his eye, the eye of death. Then Gilgamesh called to Shamash and his tears were
flowing, ‘O glorious Shamash, I have followed the road you commanded but now if you send no 
11
succour how shall I escape?’ Glorious Shamash heard his prayer and he summoned the great
wind, the north wind, the whirlwind, the storm and the icy wind, the tempest and the scorching
wind; they came like dragons, like a scorching fire, like a serpent that freezes the heart, a
destroying flood and the lightning’s fork. The eight winds rose up against Humbaba, they beat
against his eyes; he was gripped, unable to go forward or back. Gilgamesh shouted, ‘By the life
of Ninsun my mother and divine Lugulbanda my father, in the Country of the Living, in this
Land I have discovered your dwelling; my weak arms and my small weapons I have brought to
this Land against you, and now I will enter your house’.
So he felled the first cedar and they cut the branches and laid them at the foot of the
mountain. At the first stroke Humbaba blazed out, but still they advanced. They felled seven
cedars and cut and bound the branches and laid them at the foot of the mountain, and seven times
Humbaba loosed his glory on them. As the seventh blaze died out they reached his lair. He
slapped his thigh in scorn. He approached like a noble wild bull roped on the mountain, a warrior
whose elbows are bound together. The tears started to his eyes and he was pale, ‘Gilgamesh, let
me speak. I have never known a mother, no, nor a father who reared me. I was born of the
mountain, he reared me, and Enlil made me the keeper of this forest. Let me go free, Gilgamesh,
and I will be your servant, you shall be my lord; all the trees of the forest that I tended on the
mountain shall be yours. I will cut them down and build you a palace.’ He took him by the hand
and led him to his house, so that the heart of Gilgamesh was moved with compassion. He swore
by the heavenly life, by the earthly life, by the underworld itself: ‘O Enkidu, should not the
snared bird return to its nest and the captive man return to his mother’s arms?’ Enkidu answered,
‘The strongest of men will fall to fate if he has no judgement. Namtar, the evil fate that knows no
distinction between men, will devour him. If the snared bird returns to its nest, if the captive man
returns to his mother’s arms, then you my friend will never return to the city where the mother is
waiting who gave you birth. He will bar the mountain road against you, and make the pathways
impassable.’
Humbaba said, ‘Enkidu, what you have spoken is evil: you, a hireling, dependent for your
bread! in envy and for fear of a rival you have spoken evil words.’ Enkidu said, ‘Do not listen,
Gilgamesh: this Humbaba must die. Kill Humbaba first and his servants after.’ But Gilgamesh
said, ‘If we touch him the blaze and the glory of light will be put out in confusion, the glory and
glamour will vanish, its rays will be quenched.’ Enkidu said to Gilgamesh, ‘Not so, my friend.
First entrap the bird, and where shall the chicks run then? Afterwards we can search out the glory
and the glamour, when the chicks run distracted through the grass.’
Gilgamesh listened to the word of his companion, he took the axe in his hand, he drew the
sword from his belt, and he struck Humbaba with a thrust of the sword to the neck, and Enkidu
his comrade struck the second blow. At the third blow Humbaba fell. Then there followed
confusion for this was the guardian of the forest whom they had felled to the ground. For as far
as two leagues the cedars shivered when Enkidu felled the watcher of the forest, he at whose
voice Hermon and Lebanon used to tremble. Now the mountains were moved and all the hills,
for the guardian of the forest was killed. They attacked the cedars, the seven splendours of 
12
Humbaba were extinguished. So they pressed on into the forest bearing the sword of eight
talents. They uncovered the sacred dwellings of the Anunnaki and while Gilgamesh felled the
first of the trees of the forest Enkidu cleared their roots as far as the banks of Euphrates. They set
Humbaba before the gods, before Enlil; they kissed the ground and dropped the shroud and set
the head before him. When he saw the head of Humbaba, Enlil raged at them. ‘Why did you do
this thing? From henceforth may the fire be on your faces, may it eat the bread that you eat, may
it drink where you drink.’ Then Enlil took again the blaze and the seven splendours that had been
Humbaba’s: he gave the first to the river, and he gave to the lion, to the stone of execration, to
the mountain and to the dreaded daughter of the Queen of Hell.
O Gilgamesh, king and conqueror of the dreadful blaze; wild bull who plunders the
mountain, who crosses the sea, glory to him, and from the brave the greater glory is Enki’s!
