CHAPTER 4
THE SEARCH FOR EVERLASTING LIFE
BITTERLY Gilgamesh wept for his friend Enkidu; he wandered over the wilderness as a
hunter, he roamed over the plains; in his bitterness he cried, ‘How can I rest, how can I be at
peace? Despair is in my heart. What my brother is now, that shall I be when I am dead. Because I
am afraid of death I will go as best I can to find Utnapishtim whom they call the Faraway, for he
has entered the assembly of the gods.’ So Gilgamesh travelled over the wilderness, he wandered
over the grasslands, a long journey, in search of Utnapishtim, whom the gods took after the
deluge; and they set him to live in the land of Dilmun, in the garden of the sun; and to him alone
of men they gave everlasting life.
At night when he came to the mountain passes Gilgamesh prayed: ‘In these mountain passes
long ago I saw lions, I was afraid and I lifted my eyes to the moon; I prayed and my prayers went
up to the gods, so now, O moon god Sin, protect me.’ When he had prayed he lay down to sleep,
until he was woken from out of a dream. He saw the lions round him glorying in life; then he
took his axe in his hand, he drew his sword from his belt, and he fell upon them like an arrow
from the string, and struck and destroyed and scattered them.
So at length Gilgamesh came to Mashu, the great mountains about which he had heard many
things, which guard the rising and the setting sun. Its twin peaks are as high as the wall of heaven
and its paps reach down to the underworld. At its gate the Scorpions stand guard, half man and
half dragon; their glory is terrifying, their stare strikes death into men, their shimmering halo
sweeps the mountains that guard the rising sun. When Gilgamesh saw them he shielded his eyes 
19
for the length of a moment only; then he took courage and approached. When they saw him so
undismayed the Man-Scorpion called to his mate, ‘This one who comes to us now is flesh of the
gods! The mate of the Man-Scorpion answered, ‘Two thirds is god but one third is man.’
Then he called to the man Gilgamesh, he called to the child of the gods: ‘Why have you come
so great a journey; for what have you travelled so far, crossing the dangerous waters; tell me the
reason for your coming? Gilgamesh answered, ‘For Enkidu; I loved him dearly, together we
endured all kinds of hardships; on his account I have come, for the common lot of man has taken
him. I have wept for him day and night, I would not give up his body for burial, I thought my
friend would come back because of my weeping. Since he went, my life is nothing; that is why I
have travelled here in search of Utnapishtim my father; for men say he has entered the assembly
of the gods, and has found everlasting life. I have a desire to question him concerning the living
and the dead! The Man-Scorpion opened his mouth and said, speaking to Gilgamesh, ‘No man
born of woman has done what you have asked, no mortal man has gone into the mountain; the
length of it is twelve leagues of darkness; in it there is no light, but the heart is oppressed with
darkness. From the rising of the sun to the setting of the sun there is no light.’ Gilgamesh said,
‘Although I should go in sorrow and in pain, with sighing and with weeping, still I must go.
Open the gate of the mountain.’ And the Man-Scorpion said, ‘Go, Gilgamesh, I permit you to
pass through the mountain of Mashu and through the high ranges; may your feet carry you safely
home. The gate of the mountain is open.’
When Gilgamesh heard this he did as the Man-Scorpion had said, he followed the sun’s road
to his rising, through the mountain. When he had gone one league the darkness became thick
around him, for there was no light, he could see nothing ahead and nothing behind him. After
two leagues the darkness was thick and there was no light, he could see nothing ahead and
nothing behind him. After three leagues the darkness was thick, and there was no light, he could
see nothing ahead and nothing behind him. After four leagues the darkness was thick and there
was no light, he could see nothing ahead and nothing behind him. At the end of five leagues the
darkness was thick and there was no light, he could see nothing ahead and nothing behind him.
At the end of six leagues the darkness was thick and there was no light, he could see nothing
ahead and nothing behind him. When he had gone seven leagues the darkness was thick and
there was no light, he could see nothing ahead and nothing behind him. When he had gone eight
leagues Gilgamesh gave a great cry, for the darkness was thick and he could see nothing ahead
and nothing behind him. After nine leagues he felt the north wind on his face, but the darkness
was thick and there was no light, he could see nothing ahead and nothing behind him. After ten
leagues the end was near. After eleven leagues the dawn light appeared. At the end of twelve
leagues the sun streamed out.
There was the garden of the gods; all round him stood bushes bearing gems. Seeing it he
went down at once, for there was fruit of carnelian with the vine hanging from it, beautiful to
look at; lapis lazuli leaves hung thick with fruit, sweet to see. For thorns and thistles there were
haematite and rare stones, agate, and pearls from out of the sea. While Gilgamesh walked in the
garden by the edge of the sea Shamash saw him, and he saw that he was dressed in the skins of 
20
animals and ate their flesh. He was distressed, and he spoke and said, ‘No mortal man has gone
this way before, nor will, as long as the winds drive over the sea.’ And to Gilgamesh he said,
‘You will never find the life for which you are searching.’ Gilgamesh said to glorious Shamash,
‘Now that I have toiled and strayed so far over the wilderness, am I to sleep, and let the earth
cover my head for ever? Let my eyes see the sun until they are dazzled with looking. Although I
am no better than a dead man, still let me see the light of the sun.’
Beside the sea she lives, the woman of the vine, the maker of wine; Siduri sits in the garden
at the edge of the sea, with the golden bowl and the golden vats that the gods gave her. She is
covered with a veil; and where she sits she sees Gilgamesh coming towards her, wearing skins,
the flesh of the gods in his body, but despair in his heart, and his face like the face of one who
has made a long journey. She looked, and as she scanned the distance she said in her own heart,
‘Surely this is some felon; where is he going now? And she barred her gate against him with the
crossbar and shot home the bolt. But Gilgamesh, hearing the sound of the bolt, threw up his head
and lodged his foot in the gate; he called to her, ‘Young woman, maker of wine, why do you bolt
your door; what did you see that made you bar your gate? I will break in your door and burst in
your gate, for I am Gilgamesh who seized and killed the Bull of Heaven, I killed the watchman
of the cedar forest, I overthrew Humbaba who lived in the forest, and I killed the lions in the
passes of the mountain.’
Then Siduri said to him, ‘If you are that Gilgamesh who seized and killed the Bull of Heaven,
who killed the watchman of the cedar forest, who overthrew Humbaba that lived in the forest,
and killed the lions in the passes of the mountain, why are your cheeks so starved and why is
your face so drawn? Why is despair in your heart and your face like the face of one who has
made a long journey? Yes, why is your face burned from heat and cold, and why do you come
here wandering over the pastures in search of the wind?
Gilgamesh answered her, ‘And why should not my cheeks be starved and my face drawn?
Despair is in my heart and my face is the face of one who has made a long journey, it was burned
with heat and with cold. Why should I not wander over the pastures in search of the wind? My
friend, my younger brother, he who hunted the wild ass of the wilderness and the panther of the
plains, my friend, my younger brother who seized and killed the Bull of Heaven and overthrew
Humbaba -in the cedar forest, my friend who was very dear to me and who endured dangers
beside me, Enkidu my brother, whom I loved, the end of mortality has overtaken him. I wept for
him seven days and nights till the worm fastened on him. Because of my brother I am afraid of
death, because of my brother I stray through the wilderness and cannot rest. But now, young
woman, maker of wine, since I have seen your face do not let me see the face of death which I
dread so much.’
She answered, ‘Gilgamesh, where are you hurrying to? You will never find that life for which
you are looking. When the gods created man they allotted to him death, but life they retained in
their own keeping. As for you, Gilgamesh, fill your belly with good things; day and night, night
and day, dance and be merry, feast and rejoice. Let your clothes be fresh, bathe yourself in water,
cherish the little child that holds your hand, and make your wife happy in your embrace; for this 
21
too is the lot of man.
But Gilgamesh said to Siduri, the young woman, ‘How can I be silent, how can I rest, when
Enkidu whom I love is dust, and I too shall die and be laid in the earth. You live by the sea-shore
and look into the heart of it; young woman, tell me now, which is the way to Utnapishtim, the
son of Ubara-Tutu? What directions are there for the passage; give me, oh, give me directions. I
will cross the Ocean if it is possible; if it is not I will wander still farther in the wilderness.’ The
wine-maker said to him, ‘Gilgamesh, there is no crossing the Ocean; whoever has come, since
the days of old, has not been able to pass that sea. The Sun in his glory crosses the Ocean, but
who beside Shamash has ever crossed it? The place and the passage are difficult, and the waters
of death are deep which flow between. Gilgamesh, how will you cross the Ocean? When you
come to the waters of death what will you do? But Gilgamesh, down in the woods you will find
Urshanabi, the ferryman of Utnapishtim; with him are the holy things, the things of stone. He is
fashioning the serpent prow of the boat. Look at him well, and if it is possible, perhaps you will
cross the waters with him; but if it is not possible, then you must go back.’
When Gilgamesh heard this he was seized with anger. He took his axe in his hand, and his
dagger from his belt. He crept forward and he fell on them like a javelin. Then he went into the
forest and sat down. Urshanabi saw the dagger flash and heard the axe, and he beat his head, for
Gilgamesh had shattered the tackle of the boat in his rage. Urshanabi said to him, ‘Tell me, what
is your name? I am Urshanabi, the ferryman of Utnapishtim the Faraway.’ He replied to him,
‘Gilgamesh is my name, I am from Uruk, from the house of Anu.’ Then Urshanabi said to him,
‘Why are your cheeks so starved and your face drawn? Why is despair in your heart and your
face like the face of one who has made a long journey; yes, why is your face burned with heat
and with cold, and why do you come here wandering over the pastures in search of the wind?
Gilgamesh said to him, ‘Why should not my cheeks be starved and my face drawn? Despair
is in my heart, and my face is the face of one who has made a long journey. I was burned with
heat and with cold. Why should I not wander over the pastures? My friend, my younger brother
who seized and killed the Bull of Heaven, and overthrew Humbaba in the cedar forest, my friend
who was very dear to me, and who endured dangers beside me, Enkidu my brother whom I
loved, the end of mortality has overtaken him. I wept for him seven days and nights till the worm
fastened on him. Because of my brother I am afraid of death, because of my brother I stray
through the wilderness. His fate lies heavy upon me. How can I be silent, how can I rest? He is
dust and I too shall die and be laid in the earth for ever. I am afraid of death, therefore,
Urshanabi, tell me which is the road to Utnapishtim? If it is possible I will cross the waters of
death; if not I will wander still farther through the wilderness.’
Urshanabi said to him, ‘Gilgamesh, your own hands have prevented you from crossing the
Ocean; when you destroyed the tackle of the boat you destroyed its safety.’ Then the two of them
talked it over and Gilgamesh said, ‘Why are you so angry with me, Urshanabi, for you yourself
cross the sea by day and night, at all seasons you cross it.’ ‘Gilgamesh, those things you
destroyed, their property is to carry me over the water, to prevent the waters of death from
touching me. It was for this reason that I preserved them, but you have destroyed them, and the 
22
urnu snakes with them. But now, go into the forest, Gilgamesh; with your axe cut poles, one
hundred and twenty, cut them sixty cubits long, paint them with bitumen, set on them ferrules
and bring them back.’
When Gilgamesh heard this he went into the forest, he cut poles one hundred and twenty; he
cut them sixty cubits long, he painted them with bitumen, he set on them ferrules, and he brought
them to Urshanabi. Then they boarded the boat, Gilgamesh and Urshanabi together, launching it
out on the waves of Ocean. For three days they ran on as it were a journey of a month and fifteen
days, and at last Urshanabi brought the boat to the waters of death. Then Urshanabi said to
Gilgamesh, ‘Press on, take a pole and thrust it in, but do not let your hands touch the waters.
Gilgamesh, take a second pole, take a third, take a fourth pole. Now, Gilgamesh, take a fifth, take
a sixth and seventh pole. Gilgamesh, take an eighth, and ninth, a tenth pole. Gilgamesh, take an
eleventh, take a twelfth pole.’ After one hundred and twenty thrusts Gilgamesh had used the last
pole. Then he stripped himself, he held up his arms for a mast and his covering for a sail. So
Urshanabi the ferryman brought Gilgamesh to Utnapishtim, whom they call the Faraway, who
lives in Dilmun at the place of the sun’s transit, eastward of the mountain. To him alone of men
the gods had given everlasting life.
Now Utnapishtim, where he lay at ease, looked into the distance and he said in his heart,
musing to himself, ‘Why does the boat sail here without tackle and mast; why are the sacred
stones destroyed, and why does the master not sail the boat? That man who comes is none of
mine; where I look I see a man whose body is covered with skins of beasts. Who is this who
walks up the shore behind Urshanabi, for surely he is no man of mine?’ So Utnapishtim looked
at him and said, ‘What is your name, you who come here wearing the skins of beasts, with your
cheeks starved and your face drawn? Where are you hurrying to now? For what reason have you
made this great journey, crossing the seas whose passage is difficult? Tell me the reason for your
coming.’
He replied, ‘Gilgamesh is my name. I am from Uruk, from the house of Anu.’ Then
Utnapishtim said to him, ‘If you are Gilgamesh, why are your cheeks so starved and your face
drawn? Why is despair in your heart and your face like the face of one who has made a long
journey? Yes, why is your face burned with heat and cold; and why do you come here,
wandering over the wilderness in search of the wind?
Gilgamesh said to him, ‘Why should not my checks be starved and my face drawn? Despair
is in my heart and my face is the face of one who has made a long journey. It was burned with
heat and with cold. Why should I not wander over the pastures? My friend, my younger brother
who seized and killed the Bull of Heaven and overthrew Humbaba in the cedar forest, my friend
who was very dear to me and endured dangers beside me, Enkidu, my brother whom I loved, the
end of mortality has overtaken him. I wept for him seven days and nights till the worm fastened
on him. Because of my brother I am afraid of death; because of my brother I stray through the
wilderness. His fate lies heavy upon me. How can I be silent, how can I rest? He is dust and I
shall die also and be laid in the earth for ever.’ Again Gilgamesh said, speaking to Utnapishtim,
‘It is to see Utnapishtim whom we call the Faraway that I have come this journey. For this I have 
23
wandered over the world, I have crossed many difficult ranges, I have crossed the seas, I have
wearied myself with travelling; my joints are aching, and I have lost acquaintance with sleep
which is sweet. My clothes were worn out before I came to the house of Siduri. I have killed the
bear and hyena, the lion and panther, the tiger, the stag and the ibex, all sorts of wild game and
the small creatures of the pastures. I ate their flesh and I wore their skins; and that was how I
came to the gate of the young woman, the maker of wine, who barred her gate of pitch and
bitumen against me. But from her I had news of the journey; so then I came to Urshanabi the
ferryman, and with him I crossed over the waters of death. Oh, father Utnapishtim, you who have
entered the assembly of the gods, I wish to question you concerning the living and the dead, how
shall I find the life for which I am searching?
Utnapishtim said, ‘There is no permanence. Do we build a house to stand for ever, do we seal
a contract to hold for all time? Do brothers divide an inheritance to keep for ever, does the floodtime of rivers endure? It is only the nymph of the dragon-fly who sheds her larva and sees the
sun in his glory. From the days of old there is no permanence. The sleeping and the dead, how
alike they are, they are like a painted death. What is there between the master and the servant
when both have fulfilled their doom? When the Anunnaki, the judges, come together, and
Mammetun the mother of destinies, together they decree the fates of men. Life and death they
allot but the day of death they do not disclose.’
Then Gilgamesh said to Utnapishtim the Faraway, ‘I look at you now, Utnapishtim, and your
appearance is no different from mine; there is nothing strange in your features. I thought I should
find you like a hero prepared for battle, but you lie here taking your ease on your back. Tell me
truly, how was it that you came to enter the company of the gods and to possess everlasting life?’
Utnapishtim said to Gilgamesh, ‘I will reveal to you a mystery, I will tell you a secret of the
gods.’ 
