CHAPTER 6
THE RETURN
UTNAPISHTIM said, ‘As for you, Gilgamesh, who will assemble the gods for your sake, so
that you may find that life for which you are searching? But if you wish, come and put it to the
test: only prevail against sleep for six days and seven nights.’ But while Gilgamesh sat there
resting on his haunches, a mist of sleep like soft wool teased from the fleece drifted over him,
and Utnapishtim said to his wife, ‘Look at him now, the strong man who would have everlasting
life, even now the mists of sleep are drifting over him. ‘His wife replied, ‘Touch the man to wake
him, so that he may return to his own land in peace, going back through the gate by which he
came.’ Utnapishtim said to his wife, ‘All men are deceivers, even you he will attempt to deceive;
therefore bake loaves of bread, each day one loaf, and put it beside his head; and make a mark on
the wall to number the days he has slept.’
So she baked loaves of bread, each day one loaf, and put it beside his head, and she marked
on the wall the days that he slept; and there came a day when the first loaf was hard, the second
loaf was like leather, the third was soggy, the crust of the fourth had mould, the fifth was
mildewed, the sixth was fresh, and the seventh was still on the embers. Then Utnapishtim
touched him and he woke. Gilgamesh said to Utnapishtim the Faraway, ‘I hardly slept when you
touched and roused me.’ But Utnapishtim said,
‘Count these loaves and learn how many days you slept, for your first is hard, your second
like leather, your third is soggy, the crust of your fourth has mould, your fifth is mildewed, your
sixth is fresh and your seventh was still over the glowing embers when I touched and woke you.’
Gilgamesh said, ‘What shall I do, O Utnapishtim, where shall I go? Already the thief in the night
has hold of my limbs, death inhabits my room; wherever my foot rests, there I find death.’
Then Utnapishtim spoke to Urshanabi the ferryman: ‘Woe to you Urshanabi, now and for
ever more you have become hateful to this harbourage; it is not for you, nor for you are the
crossings of this sea. Go now, banished from the shore. But this man before whom you walked,
bringing him here, whose body is covered with foulness and the grace of whose limbs has been
spoiled by wild skins, take him to the washing-place. There he shall wash his long hair clean as
snow in the water, he shall throw off his skins and let the sea carry them away, and the beauty of
his body shall be shown, the fillet on his forehead shall be renewed, and he shall be given clothes 
27
to cover his nakedness. Till he reaches his own city and his journey is accomplished, these
clothes will show no sign of age, they will wear like a new garment.’ So Urshanabi took
Gilgamesh and led him to the washing-place, he washed his long hair as clean as snow in the
water, he threw off his skins, which the sea carried away, and showed the beauty of his body. He
renewed the fillet on his forehead, and to cover his nakedness gave him clothes which would
show no sign of age, but would wear like a new garment till he reached his own city, and his
journey was accomplished.
Then Gilgamesh and Urshanabi launched the boat on to the water and boarded it, and they
made ready to sail away; but the wife of Utnapishtim the Faraway said to him, ‘Gilgamesh came
here wearied out, he is worn out; what will you give him to carry him back to his own country?
So Utnapishtim spoke, and Gilgamesh took a pole and brought the boat on to the bank.
‘Gilgamesh, you came here a man wearied out, you have worn yourself out; what shall I give
you to carry you back to your own country? Gilgamesh, I shall reveal a secret thing, it is a
mystery of the gods that I am telling you. There is a plant that grows under the water, it has a
prickle like a thorn, like a rose; it will wound your hands, but if you succeed in taking it, then
your hands will hold that which restores his lost youth to a man.’
When Gilgamesh heard this he opened the sluices so that a sweet-water current might carry
him out to the deepest channel; he tied heavy stones to his feet and they dragged him down to the
water-bed. There he saw the plant growing; although it pricked him he took it in his hands; then
he cut the heavy stones from his feet, and the sea carried him and threw him on to the shore.
Gilgamesh said to Urshanabi the ferryman, ‘Come here, and see this marvellous plant. By its
virtue a man may win back all his former strength. I will take it to Uruk of the strong walls; there
I will give it to the old men to eat. Its name shall be “The Old Men Are Young Again”; and at
last I shall eat it myself and have back all my lost youth.’ So Gilgamesh returned by the gate
through which he had come, Gilgamesh and Urshanabi went together. They travelled their
twenty leagues and then they broke their fast; after thirty leagues they stopped for the night.
Gilgamesh saw a well of cool water and he went down and bathed; but deep in the pool there
was lying a serpent, and the serpent sensed the sweetness of the flower. It rose out of the water
and snatched it away, and immediately it sloughed its skin and returned to the well. Then
Gilgamesh sat down and wept, the tears ran down his face, and he took the hand of Urshanabi;
‘O Urshanabi, was it for this that I toiled with my hands, is it for this I have wrung out my
heart’s blood? For myself I have gained nothing; not I, but the beast of the earth has joy of it
now. Already the stream has carried it twenty leagues back to the channels where I found it. I
found a sign and now I have lost it. Let us leave the boat on the bank and go.’
After twenty leagues they broke their fast, after thirty leagues they stopped for the night; in
three days they had walked as much as a journey of a month and fifteen days. When the journey
was accomplished they arrived at Uruk, the strong-walled city. Gilgamesh spoke to him, to
Urshanabi the ferryman, ‘Urshanabi, climb up on to the wall of Uruk, inspect its foundation
terrace, and examine well the brickwork;, see if it is not of burnt bricks; and did not the seven
wise men lay these foundations? One third of the whole is city, one third is garden, and one third 
28
is field, with the precinct of the goddess Ishtar. These parts and the precinct are all Uruk.’
This too was the work of Gilgamesh, the king, who knew the countries of the world. He was
wise, he saw mysteries and knew secret things, he brought us a tale of the days before the flood.
He went a long journey, was weary, worn out with labour, and returning engraved on a stone the
whole story.
