GLOSSARY OF NAMES
A SHORT description of the gods and of other persons and places mentioned in the Epic will
be found in this Glossary. The gods were credited at different times with a variety of attributes
and characteristics, sometimes contradictory; only such as are relevant to the material of the
Gilgamesh Epic are given here. The small number of gods and other characters who play a more
important part in the story are described in the Introduction; in their case a page reference to this
description is given at the end of the Glossary note. Cross-references to other entries in the
Glossary are indicated by means of italics.
ADAD: Storm-, rain-, and weather-god.
ANUNNAKI: Usually gods of the underworld, judges of the dead and offspring of Anu.
ANSHAN: A district of Elam in south-west Persia; probably the source of supplies of wood for
making bows. Gilgamesh has a ‘bow of Anshan’.
ANTUM: Wife of Anu.
ANU: Sumerian An; father of gods, and god of the firmament, the I great above’. in the
Sumerian cosmogony there was, first of all, die primeval sea, from which was born the cosmic
mountain consisting of heaven, ‘An’, and earth, ‘Ki’; they were separated by Enlil, then An
carried off the heavens, and Enlil the earth. Anu later retreated more and more into the
background; he had an important temple in Uruk.
APSU: The Abyss; the primeval waters under the earth; in the later mythology of the Enuma
Elish, more particularly the sweet water which mingled with the bitter waters of the sea and with
a third watery element, perhaps cloud, from which the first gods were engendered. The waters of
Apsu were thought of as held immobile underground by the ‘spell’ of Ea in a death-like sleep.
ARURU: A goddess of creation, she created Enkidu -from clay in the image of Anu.
AYA: The dawn, the bride of the Sun God Shamash.
BELIT-SHERI: Scribe and recorder of the underworld gods,
BULL OF HEAVEN: A personification of drought created by Anu for Ishtar.
DILMUN: The Sumerian paradise, perhaps the Persian Gulf, sometimes described as ‘the place
where the sun rises’ and ‘the Land of the Living’; the scene of a Sumerian creation myth and the
place where the deified Sumerian hero of the flood, Ziusudra, was taken by the gods to live for
ever.
DUMUZI: The Sumerian form of Tammuz; a god of vegetation and fertility, and so of the
underworld, also called ‘the Shepherd and ‘lord of the sheepfolds’. As the companion of
Ningizzida ‘to all eternity’ he stands at the gate of heaven. In the Sumerian ‘Descent of Inanna’
he is the husband of the goddess Inanna, the Sumerian counterpart of Ishtar. According to the
Sumerian King-List Gilgamesh was descended from ‘Dumuzi a shepherd’.
EA: Sumerian Enki; god of the sweet waters, also of wisdom, a patron of arts and one of the
creators of mankind, towards whom he is usually well-disposed. The chief god of Eridu, where
he had a temple, he lived ‘in the deep’; his ancestry is uncertain, but he was probably a child of
Anu.
EANNA: The temple precinct in Uruk sacred to Anu and Ishtar.
31
EGALMAH: The ‘Great Palace’ in Uruk, the home of the goddess Ninsun, the mother of
Gilgamesh,
ENDUKUGGA: With Nindukugga, Sumerian gods living in the underworld; parents of Enlil.
ENKIDU: Moulded by Aruru, goddess of creation, out of clay in the image and ‘of the essence
of Anu’, the sky-god, and of Ninurta the war-god. The companion of Gilgamesh, he is wild or
natural man; be was later considered a patron or god of animals and may have been the hero of
another cycle.
ENLIL: God of earth, wind, and the universal air, ultimately spirit; the executive of Anu. In the
Sumerian cosmogony he was born of the union of An heaven, and Ki earth. These he separated,
and he then carried off earth as his portion. In later times he supplanted Anu as chief god. He
was the patron of the city of Nippur.
ENMUL: See Endukugga.
ENNUGI: God of irrigation and inspector of canals.
ENUMA ELISH: The Semitic creation epic which describes the creation of the gods, the defeat
of the powers of chaos by the young god Marduk, and the creation of man from the blood of
Kingu, the defeated champion of chaos. The title is taken from the first words of the epic ‘When
on high’.
ERESHKIGAL: The Queen of the underworld, a counterpart of Persephone; probably once a
sky-goddess. Li the Sumerian cosmogony she was carried off to the underworld after the
separation of heaven and earth.
ETANA: Legendary king of Kish who reigned after the flood; in the epic which bears his name
he was carried to heaven on the back of an eagle.
GILGAMESH: The hero of the Epic; son of the goddess Ninsun and of a priest of Kullab, fifth
king of Uruk after the flood, famous as a great builder and as a judge of the dead. A cycle of epic
poems has collected round his name.
HANISH: A divine herald of storm and bad weather.
HUMBABA: Also Huwawa; a guardian of the cedar forest who opposes Gilgamesh and is killed
by him and Enkidu. A nature divinity, perhaps an Anatolian, Elamite, or Syrian god.
IGIGI: Collective name for the great gods of heaven.
IRKALLA: Another name for Ereshkigal, the Queen of the underworld.
ISHTAR: Sumerian Inanna; the goddess of love and fertility, also goddess of war, called the
Queen of Heaven. She is the daughter of Anu and patroness of Uruk, where she has a temple.
ISHULLANA: The gardener of Anu, once loved by Ishtar whom he rejected; he was turned by
her into a mole or frog.
KI: The earth.
KULLAB: Part of Uruk.
LUGULBANDA: Third king of the post-diluvian dynasty of Uruk, a god and shepherd, and hero
of a cycle of Sumerian poems; protector of Gilgamesh.
MAGAN: A land to the west of Mesopotamia, sometimes Egypt or Arabia, and sometimes the
land of the dead, the underworld.
32
MAGILUM: Uncertain meaning, perhaps ‘the boat of the dead’.
MAMMETUM: Ancestral goddess responsible for destinies.
MAN-SCORPION: Guardian, with a similar female monster, of the mountain into which the sun
descends at nightfall. Shown on sealings and ivory inlays as a figure with the upper part of the
body human and the lower part ending in a scorpion’s tail. According to the Enuma Elish created
by the primeval waters in order to fight the gods.
MASHU: The word means ‘twins’ in the Akkadian language. A mountain with twin peaks into
which the sun descends at nightfall and from which it returns at dawn. Sometimes thought of as
Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon.
NAMTAR: Fate, destiny in its evil aspect; pictured as a demon of the underworld, also a
messenger and chief minister of Ereshkigal; a bringer of disease and pestilence.
NEDU: See Neti.
NERGAL: Underworld god, sometimes the husband of Ereshkigal, he is the subject of an
Akkadian poem which describes his translation from heaven to the underworld; plague-god.
NETI: The Sumerian form of Nedu, the chief gate-keeper in the underworld.
NINDUKUGGA: With Endukugga, parental gods living in the underworld.
NINGAL: Wife of the Moon God and mother of the Sun.
NINGIRSU: An earlier form of Ninurta; god of irrigation and fertility, he had a field near Lagash
where all sorts of plants flourished; he was the child of a she-goat.
NINGIZZIDA: Also Gizzida; a fertility god, addressed as ‘Lord of the Tree of Life’; sometimes
he is a serpent with human head, but later he was a god of healing and magic; the companion of
Tammuz, with whom he stood at the gate of heaven.
NINHURSAG: Sumerian mother-goddess; one of the four principal Sumerian gods with An,
Enlil, and Enki; sometimes the wife of Enki, she created all vegetation. The name means ‘the
Mother’; she is also called ‘Nintu’, lady of birth, and Ki, the earth.
NINKI: The ‘mother’ of Enlil, probably a form of Ninhursag.
NINLIL: Goddess of heaven, earth, and air and in one aspect of the underworld; wife of Enlil
and mother of the Moon; worshipped with Enlil in Nippur.
NINSUN: The mother of Gilgamesh, a minor goddess whose house was in Uruk; she was noted
for wisdom, and was the wife of Lugulbanda.
NINURTA: The later form of Ningirsu; a warrior and god of war, a herald, the south wind, and
god of wells and irrigation. According to one poem he once dammed up the bitter waters of the
underworld and conquered various monsters.
NISABA: Goddess of grain.
NISIR: Probably means ‘Mountain of Salvation’; sometimes identified with the Pir Oman
Gudrun range south of the lower Zab, or with the biblical Ararat north of Lake Van.
PUZUR-AMURRI: The steersman of Utnapishtim during the flood.
33
SAMUQAN: God of cattle.
SEVEN SAGES: Wise men who brought civilization to the seven oldest cities of Mesopotamia.
SHAMASH: Sumerian Utu; the sun; for the Sumerians he was principally the judge and lawgiver with some fertility attributes. For the Semites he was also a victorious warrior, the god of
wisdom, the son of Sin, and ‘greater than his father’. He was the husband and brother of Ishtar.
He is represented with the saw with which he cuts decisions. In the poems ‘Shamash’ may mean
the god, or simply the sun.
SHULLAT: A divine herald of storm and of bad weather.
SHULPAE: A god who presided over feasts and feasting.
SHURRUPAK: Modem Fara, eighteen miles north-west of Uruk; one of the oldest cities of
Mesopotamia, and one of the five named by the Sumerians as having existed before the flood.
The home of the hero of the flood story.
SIDURI: The divine wine-maker and brewer; she lives on the shore of the sea (perhaps the
Mediterranean), in the garden of the sun. Her name in the Hurrian language means ‘young
woman’ and she may be a form of Ishtar.
SILILI: The mother of the stallion; a divine mare?
SIN: Sumerian Nanna, the moon. The chief Sumerian astral deity, the father of Utu- Shamash,
the sun, and of Ishtar. His parents were Enlil and Ninlil. His chief temple was in Ur.
TAMMUZ: Sumerian Dumuzi; the dying god of vegetation, bewailed by Ishtar, the subject of
laments and litanies. In an Akkadian poem Ishtar descends to the underworld in search of her
young husband Tammuz; but in the Sumerian poem on which this is based it is Inanna herself
who is responsible for sending Dumuzi to the underworld because of his pride and as a hostage
for her own safe return.
UBARA-TUTU: A king of Shurrupak and father of Utnapishtim The only king of Kish named in
the prediluvian King-List, apart from Utnapishtim.
URSHANABI: old Babylonian Sursunabu; the boatman of Utnapishtim who ferries daily across
the waters of death which divide the garden of the sun from the paradise where Utnapishtim lives
for ever (the Sumerian Dilmun). By accepting Gilgamesh as a passenger he forfeits this right,
and accompanies Gilgamesh back to Uruk instead.
URUK: Biblical Erech, modem Warka, in southern Babylonia between Fara (Shurrupak) and Ur.
Shown by excavation to have been an important city from very early times, with great temples to
the gods Anu and Ishtar. Traditionally the enemy of the city of Kish, and after the flood the seat
of a dynasty of kings, among whom Gilgamesh was the fifth and most famous.
UTNAPISHTIM: Old Babylonian Utanapishtim, Sumerian Ziusudra; in the Sumerian poems he
is a wise king and priest of Shurrupak; in the Akkadian sources he is a wise citizen of Shurrupak.
He is the son of Ubara-Tutu, and his name is usually translated, ‘He Who Saw Life’. He is the
protégé of the god Ea, by whose connivance he survives the flood, with his family and with ‘the
seed of all living creatures’; afterwards he is taken by the gods to live for ever at ‘the mouth of
the rivers’ and given the epithet ‘Faraway’; or according to the Sumerians he lives in Dilmun
where the sun rises.
